---
layout: post
title: "Git"
description: "All I have learnt about `git`"
category:
tags: [git]
---

I don't really like git. There, I've admitted it in public. Good thing there
aren't comments on this blog...

I first learnt version control with [Mercurial][1] and have liked it ever since.
Obviously, I'm no more objective than anyone else, but I'm reasonably convinced
that my preference for Mercurial is not just that I learnt it first. I think
it's UX design is much better than git's, the documentation is better, and it's
easily as powerful whilst keeping the more dangerous stuff (history-rewriting
stuff mostly) locked away in plugins which are shipped with the default install
anyway.

However, git seems to have "won" because of essentially two factors:

1. the fact that it is used for linux kernel development;
2. [GitHub][2], which is far and away the best free source hosting site
around. [Bitbucket][3] hosts Mercurial repos but it is definitely not as slick
or, more importantly, popular as GitHub.

Therefore, I need to learn git better. Hence this post, or more likely, a
series of posts. If I want to learn git, and my personal preference is always
just to use `hg`, then I need to have some reason to _make_ me learn it.

A lot of this will be written from the point of view of a Mercurial user, but I
will make an attempt to learn git properly, not just "how to do `hg` using
`git`".

## Basics

#### Cloning

Cloning is straightforward enough, though I prefer that you always specify the
protocol in Mercurial, rather than defaulting to ssh.

To clone a repo, for example GitHub gitignore templates, use the command:

```
git clone git@github.com:github/gitignore.git
```

#### Staging

Staging is one area that just doesn't really exist in Mercurial. The same end
result can be obtained with Mercurial, it just doesn't happen by default, which
I'd argue is better.

It's even nicer if you use [TortoiseHg][4], because that
makes it really easy to choose not just which files to commit, but which _hunks_
of which files to commit. I've used this a few times when I should have committed
a change but I didn't and have gone on to make more changes to the same file(s).
It would be better to just remember to commit, and I'm getting better at that,
but it's still helped quite often. I'll say more about GUIs/tools later.

Anyway, any changes you want to commit with git have to be staged first, which is
~~sensibly~~ mysteriously done with the ~~`stage`~~ `add` command both to add
untracked files and to stage changes to tracked files. To just add all untracked
files _and_ stage all changes in tracked files use

```
git add .
```




[1]: http://mercurial.selenic.com/
[2]: https://github.com
[3]: https://bitbucket.com